The French Republic is an indivisible, secular, democratic and social Republic. It ensures the equality of all citizens before the law without distinction of origin, race or religion. It respects all beliefs. Its organization is decentralized. The language of the Republic is French. The national emblem is the tricolor flag, blue, white, and red. Title I: Sovereignty (Articles 2 to 4). Article 2: Modified by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 8.

Le Président de la République est le chef des armées.

The national anthem is the "Marseillaise". The motto of the Republic is "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity". Its principle is: government of the people, by the people and for the people. Article 3 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 99-569 of July 8, 1999 - art. 1 National sovereignty belongs to the people who exercise it through their representatives and by referendum. No section of the people or individual may claim to exercise it. The vote may be direct or indirect in the conditions provided for by the Constitution. It is always universal, equal and secret. Voters, in the conditions determined by law, are all French nationals of both sexes, enjoying their civil and political rights. The law promotes equal access for women and men to electoral mandates and elective functions. Article 4 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 99-569 of July 8, 1999 - art. 2 Parties and political groups contribute to the expression of the vote. They are formed and exercise their activity freely. They must respect the principles of national sovereignty and democracy. They contribute to the implementation of the principle set out in the last paragraph of Article 3 in the conditions determined by law. Title II: The President of the Republic (Articles 5 to 19) Article 5 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 9 The President of the Republic ensures respect for the Constitution. He ensures, by his arbitration, the regular functioning of the public powers as well as the continuity of the State. He is the guarantor of national independence, the integrity of the territory and respect for treaties. Article 6 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 2000-964 of October 2, 2000 - art. unique The President of the Republic is elected for five years by direct universal suffrage. The modalities for the application of this article are fixed by an organic law. Article 7 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003 - art. 12 The President of the Republic is the head of the armed forces.


The President of the Republic is elected by an absolute majority of the votes cast. If this majority is not obtained in the first round of voting, a second round is held on the fourteenth day following. Only the two candidates who, if necessary after the withdrawal of more favored candidates, have obtained the greatest number of votes in the first round may stand in the second round.
The voting is opened upon convocation of the Government.
The election of the new President takes place at least twenty days and at most thirty-five days before the expiration of the powers of the President in office.
In case of vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic for any reason whatsoever, or of impediment established by the Constitutional Council, seized by the Government and ruling by an absolute majority of its members, the functions of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those provided for in Articles 11 and 12 below, are provisionally exercised by the President of the Senate and, if he is in turn prevented from exercising these functions, by the Government.
In case of vacancy or when the impediment is declared definitive by the Constitutional Council, the voting for the election of the new President takes place, unless there is a case of force majeure established by the Constitutional Council, at least twenty days and at most thirty-five days after the opening of the vacancy or the declaration of the definitive character of the impediment.
If, within the seven days preceding the deadline for the submission of candidatures, one of the persons who, less than thirty days before this date, publicly announced his decision to be a candidate dies or is prevented, the Constitutional Council may decide to postpone the election.
If, before the first round, one of the candidates dies or is prevented, the Constitutional Council orders the postponement of the election.
In case of death or impediment of one of the two most favored candidates before the eventual withdrawals, the Constitutional Council declares that all electoral operations must be carried out again; the same applies in case of death or impediment of the two candidates remaining in the presence for the second round.
In all cases, the Constitutional Council is seized under the conditions set out in the second paragraph of Article 61 below or those determined for the presentation of a candidate by the organic law provided for in Article 6 above.
The Constitutional Council may extend the deadlines provided for in the third and fifth paragraphs without the voting taking place more than thirty-five days after the date of the decision of the Constitutional Council. If the application of the provisions of this paragraph has had the effect of postponing the election to a date after the expiration of the powers of the President in office, he remains in office until the proclamation of his successor.


His successor cannot apply Articles 49 and 50 or Article 89 of the Constitution during the vacancy of the Presidency of the Republic or during the period between the declaration of the definitive nature of the impediment of the President of the Republic and the election of his successor.

Le Président de la République peut, après consultation du Premier ministre et des 
Présidents des Assemblées, prononcer la dissolution de l'Assemblée nationale.

Article 8: The President of the Republic appoints the Prime Minister. He ends his functions upon the presentation by the latter of the Government's resignation. On the proposal of the Prime Minister, he appoints the other members of the Government and ends their functions.
Article 9: The President of the Republic presides over the Council of Ministers.
Article 10: The President of the Republic promulgates laws within fifteen days of the final adoption of the law being transmitted to the Government. He may, before the expiration of this period, request the Parliament for a new deliberation of the law or of certain of its articles. This new deliberation cannot be refused.
Article 11: Modified by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 1 The President of the Republic, on the proposal of the Government during the duration of the sessions or on the joint proposal of both assemblies, published in the Official Journal, may submit to referendum any bill relating to the organization of public powers, reforms relating to the economic or social policy of the nation and the public services that contribute to it, or to authorize the ratification of a treaty that, without being contrary to the Constitution, would have implications for the functioning of the institutions. When the referendum is organized on the proposal of the Government, it makes, before each assembly, a declaration which is followed by a debate. When the referendum has concluded to the adoption of the bill, the President of the Republic promulgates the law within fifteen days of the proclamation of the results of the consultation.
Article 12: Modified by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 3 The President of the Republic, after consulting the Prime Minister and the Presidents of the Assemblies, may pronounce the dissolution of the National Assembly. General elections take place at least twenty days and at most forty days after the dissolution. The National Assembly meets of right on the second Thursday following its election. If this meeting takes place outside the period provided for the ordinary session, a session is opened of right for a period of fifteen days. A new dissolution cannot be made in the year following these elections.
Article 13: Modified by Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003 - Art. 12 The President of the Republic, after consulting the Prime Minister and the Presidents of the Assemblies, may pronounce the dissolution of the National Assembly.


The President of the Republic signs ordinances and decrees deliberated in the Council of Ministers. He appoints to civil and military positions of the State. Councillors of State, the Grand Chancellor of the Legion of Honor, ambassadors and extraordinary envoys, Councillors Masters at the Court of Accounts, prefects, representatives of the State in the overseas collectivities governed by Article 74 and in New Caledonia, general officers, rectors of academies, directors of central administrations, are appointed in the Council of Ministers. An organic law determines the other positions to which it is provided in the Council of Ministers as well as the conditions in which the power of nomination of the President of the Republic can be delegated by him to be exercised in his name.
Article 14 The President of the Republic accredits ambassadors and extraordinary envoys to foreign powers; foreign ambassadors and extraordinary envoys are accredited to him.
Article 15 The President of the Republic is the head of the armies. He presides over the higher councils and committees of national defense.
Article 16 When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the Nation, the integrity of its territory or the execution of its international commitments are threatened (1) in a serious and immediate manner and the regular functioning of the constitutional public powers is interrupted, the President of the Republic takes the measures required by these circumstances, after official consultation of the Prime Minister, the Presidents of the Assemblies and the Constitutional Council. He informs the Nation by a message. These measures must be inspired by the will to ensure the constitutional public powers, as soon as possible, the means to accomplish their mission. The Constitutional Council is consulted on them. Parliament meets of its own right. The National Assembly cannot be dissolved during the exercise of exceptional powers.
NOTE: (1): This article was originally published with a spelling mistake. The term "threatened" should indeed be written "threatened".
Article 17 The President of the Republic has the right to pardon.
Article 18 The President of the Republic communicates with the two Houses of Parliament by messages which he has read and which do not give rise to any debate.


Outside of session, the Parliament is specially convened for this purpose. Article 19 The acts of the President of the Republic other than those provided for in Articles 8 (first paragraph), 11, 12, 16, 18, 54, 56 and 61 are countersigned by the Prime Minister and, where applicable, by the responsible ministers. Title III: The Government (Articles 20 to 23) Article 20 The Government determines and conducts the policy of the Nation. It has control of the administration and the armed forces. It is responsible to the Parliament under the conditions and according to the procedures provided for in Articles 49 and 50. Article 21 The Prime Minister directs the action of the Government. He is responsible for National Defense. He ensures the execution of the laws. Subject to the provisions of Article 13, he exercises the regulatory power and appoints to civil and military posts. He may delegate some of his powers to ministers. He may, exceptionally, substitute for the President of the Republic in the chairmanship of the councils and committees provided for in Article 15. He may, by express delegation and for a determined agenda, substitute for the President of the Republic in the chairmanship of a Council of Ministers. Article 22 The acts of the Prime Minister are countersigned, where applicable, by the ministers responsible for their execution. Article 23 The functions of a member of the Government are incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, any national professional representation function and any public office or any professional activity. An organic law sets the conditions under which replacements are provided for holders of such mandates, functions or offices. The replacement of members of Parliament takes place in accordance with the provisions of Article 25. Title IV: The Parliament (Articles 24 to 33) Article 24 The Parliament comprises the National Assembly and the Senate. Deputies to the National Assembly are elected by direct suffrage. The Senate is elected by indirect suffrage. It ensures the representation of the territorial collectivities of the Republic. French citizens living abroad are represented in the Senate.

Aucune assemblée ne peut se réunir en dehors de la session ordinaire sans l'autorisation 
du Président de la République.

Article 25: An organic law sets the duration of the powers of each assembly, the number of its members, their indemnity, the eligibility conditions, the regime of ineligibilities and incompatibilities. It also sets the conditions under which the persons called to replace the deputies or senators in case of vacancy of the seat until the general or partial renewal of the assembly to which they belonged are elected.
Article 26: Modified by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 7 No member of Parliament may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or tried for the opinions or votes he has expressed in the exercise of his functions. No member of Parliament may be subject, in criminal or correctional matters, to arrest or any other measure depriving or restricting his liberty without the authorization of the Bureau of the assembly of which he is a member. This authorization is not required in case of a flagrant crime or offense or a final conviction. The detention, the measures depriving or restricting liberty or the prosecution of a member of Parliament are suspended for the duration of the session if the assembly of which he is a member so requests. The interested assembly is convened ex officio for additional sessions to allow, if necessary, the application of the above paragraph.
Article 27: Any imperative mandate is null. The voting right of the members of Parliament is personal. The organic law may exceptionally authorize the delegation of vote. In this case, no one can receive delegation of more than one mandate.
Article 28: Modified by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 2 Parliament shall meet ex officio in an ordinary session which shall begin on the first working day of October and shall end on the last working day of June. The number of days of session that each assembly can hold during the ordinary session shall not exceed one hundred and twenty. The weeks of session are fixed by each assembly. The Prime Minister, after consulting the president of the concerned assembly, or the majority of the members of each assembly may decide to hold additional days of session. The days and hours of the sessions are determined by the rules of each assembly.
Article 29: No assembly may meet outside the ordinary session without the authorization of the President of the Republic.

- l'organisation des pouvoirs publics ;
- les libertés publiques ;
- les droits et devoirs des citoyens ;
- les garanties fondamentales accordées aux citoyens pour l'exercice des libertés 
publiques ;
- les sujétions imposées par la Défense nationale aux citoyens en leur personne et en 
leurs biens ;
- la nationalité, l'état et la capacité des personnes, les régimes matrimoniaux, les 
successions et libéralités ;
- la détermination des crimes et délits ainsi que les peines qui leur sont applicables ;
la procédure pénale ; l'amnistie ; la création de nouveaux ordres de juridiction et le 
statut des magistrats ;
- l'assiette, le taux et les modalités de recouvrement des impositions de toutes natures
; le régime d'émission de la monnaie ;
- l'organisation des pouvoirs publics ;
- les libertés publiques ;
- les droits et devoirs des citoyens.

The Parliament is convened in extraordinary session at the request of the Prime Minister or the majority of the members of the National Assembly, on a predetermined agenda. When the extraordinary session is held at the request of the members of the National Assembly, the decree of closure takes effect as soon as the Parliament has exhausted the agenda for which it was convened and at the latest twelve days from its meeting. The Prime Minister alone can request a new session before the expiration of the month following the decree of closure.
Article 30
Except in cases in which the Parliament meets of right, extraordinary sessions are opened and closed by decree of the President of the Republic.
Article 31
Members of the Government have access to both Assemblies. They are heard when they request it. They can be assisted by commissioners of the Government.
Article 32
The President of the National Assembly is elected for the duration of the legislature. The President of the Senate is elected after each partial renewal.
Article 33
The sessions of both Assemblies are public. The full report of the debates is published in the Official Journal. Each Assembly can sit in secret committee at the request of the Prime Minister or one tenth of its members.
Title V: Relations between Parliament and Government (Articles 34 to 51)
Article 34
Amended by Constitutional Law No. 2005-205 of 1 March 2005 - Art. 3
The law is voted by Parliament.
The law sets out rules concerning:
- civil rights and fundamental guarantees granted to citizens for the exercise of public freedoms; the obligations imposed by national defense on citizens in their persons and in their property;
- nationality, status and capacity of persons, matrimonial regimes, successions and donations;
- determination of crimes and offenses and the penalties applicable to them;
criminal procedure; amnesty; the creation of new orders of jurisdiction and the status of magistrates;
- the base, rate and modalities of recovery of taxes of all kinds; the regime of emission of the currency.
The law also sets out rules concerning:
- the organization of public powers;
- public freedoms;
- the rights and duties of citizens;
- the fundamental guarantees granted to citizens for the exercise of public freedoms;
- the obligations imposed by national defense on citizens in their persons and in their property;
- nationality, status and capacity of persons, matrimonial regimes, successions and donations;
- determination of crimes and offenses and the penalties applicable to them;
criminal procedure; amnesty; the creation of new orders of jurisdiction and the status of magistrates;
- the base, rate and modalities of recovery of taxes of all kinds; the regime of emission of the currency;
- the organization of public powers;
- public freedoms;
- the rights and duties of citizens.
 
la promulgation de la présente Constitution sont modifiables par décrets pris après 
avis du Conseil d'Etat.

The law determines the fundamental principles of:
- the general organization of national defense;
- the free administration of local authorities, their competences and resources;
- education;
- the preservation of the environment;
- the regime of property, real rights and civil and commercial obligations;
- labor law, union law and social security.
The finance laws determine the resources and expenses of the State under the conditions and reservations provided for by an organic law.
The social security financing laws determine the general conditions for its financial balance and, taking into account their revenue forecasts, set its expenditure objectives, under the conditions and reservations provided for by an organic law.
Program laws determine the objectives of the State's economic and social action.
The provisions of this article may be specified and supplemented by an organic law.
Article 35
Declaration of war is authorized by Parliament.
Article 36
The state of siege is decreed by the Council of Ministers. Its extension beyond twelve days can only be authorized by Parliament.
Article 37
Matters other than those in the domain of the law have a regulatory character.
Texts of legislative form intervening in these matters may be modified by decrees taken after advice from the Council of State. Those of these texts which would intervene after the promulgation of this Constitution are modifiable by decrees taken after advice from the Council of State.
 
texte déposé par le Gouvernement.

The entry into force of this Constitution shall not be modified by decree unless the Constitutional Council has declared that they have a regulatory character under the preceding paragraph. Article 37-1 Creation Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of 28 March 2003 - Art. 3 The law and the regulations may contain, for a limited object and duration, experimental provisions. Article 38 The Government may, for the execution of its program, ask Parliament for authorization to take by ordinances, for a limited period, measures which are normally within the scope of the law. The ordinances are taken in Council of Ministers after advice from the Council of State. They come into force upon their publication but become void if the draft law of ratification is not deposited before the date set by the enabling law. At the expiration of the period mentioned in the first paragraph of this article, the ordinances can no longer be modified except by law in matters which are within the legislative domain. Article 39 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of 28 March 2003 - Art. 4 The initiative of the laws belongs concurrently to the Prime Minister and to the members of Parliament. The draft laws are deliberated in Council of Ministers after advice from the Council of State and deposited on the desk of one of the two Assemblies. The draft laws of finance and the law of financing of the social security are submitted first of all to the National Assembly. Without prejudice to the first paragraph of Article 44, the draft laws having as main object the organization of the territorial collectivities and the draft laws relating to the representative instances of the French established outside France are submitted first of all to the Senate. Article 40 Proposals and amendments formulated by the members of Parliament are not receivable when their adoption would have the consequence either of a decrease of the public resources, or of the creation or aggravation of a public charge. Article 41 If it appears during the legislative procedure that a proposal or an amendment is not within the scope of the law or is contrary to a delegation granted under Article 38, the Government may oppose inadmissibility. In case of disagreement between the Government and the President of the concerned Assembly, the Constitutional Council, at the request of one or the other, rules within a period of eight days. Article 42 The discussion of the draft laws takes place, before the first Assembly seized, on the text deposited by the Government.
 
qu'à la majorité des trois cinquièmes des membres composant cette assemblée.

The text presented by the Government:
A Assembly seized of a text voted by the other Assembly deliberates on the text that is transmitted to it.
Article 43
Projects and bills are, at the request of the Government or of the Assembly seized of them, sent for examination to specially designated commissions for this purpose. Projects and proposals for which such a request has not been made are sent to one of the permanent commissions whose number is limited to six in each Assembly.
Article 44
Members of Parliament and the Government have the right of amendment. After the opening of the debate, the Government may oppose the examination of any amendment which has not previously been submitted to the commission. If the Government so requests, the Assembly seized shall decide by a single vote on all or part of the text under discussion, taking into account only the amendments proposed or accepted by the Government.
Article 45
Any project or bill is examined successively in the two Assemblies of Parliament in order to adopt an identical text. When, as a result of a disagreement between the two Assemblies, a project or bill has not been adopted after two readings by each Assembly or, if the Government has declared urgency, after one reading by each of them, the Prime Minister has the power to convene a joint mixed committee charged with proposing a text on the provisions remaining under discussion.
The text elaborated by the mixed committee may be submitted by the Government for approval to the two Assemblies. No amendment is receivable except with the agreement of the Government.
If the mixed committee fails to adopt a common text or if this text is not adopted under the conditions provided for in the preceding paragraph, the Government may, after a new reading by the National Assembly and by the Senate, request the National Assembly to make a final ruling. In this case, the National Assembly may take up either the text elaborated by the mixed committee or the last text voted by it, modified if necessary by one or more of the amendments adopted by the Senate.
Article 46
Laws to which the Constitution gives the character of organic laws are voted and modified under the following conditions:
The project or proposal is not submitted to the deliberation and vote of the first Assembly seized until the expiration of a period of fifteen days after its deposit.
The procedure of Article 45 is applicable. However, in the absence of agreement between the two Assemblies, the text can only be adopted by the National Assembly in the last reading by a majority of three-fifths of the members of this Assembly.

Les lois organiques relatives au Parlement doivent être votées dans les mêmes termes
par les deux assemblées et être promulguées après déclaration par le Conseil 
constitutionnel de leur conformité à la Constitution.

Laws relating to the Senate must be voted on in the same terms by both assemblies and must be promulgated after declaration by the Constitutional Council of their conformity to the Constitution. Article 47 The Parliament votes on the draft budget laws in the conditions provided for by an organic law. If the National Assembly has not pronounced itself in first reading within the forty-day period after the deposit of a project, the Government shall refer it to the Senate which must rule within a period of fifteen days. It is then proceeded in the conditions provided for in Article 45. If the Parliament has not pronounced itself within a period of seventy days, the provisions of the project may be put into force by ordinance. If the finance law setting the resources and charges of an exercise has not been deposited in time to be promulgated before the beginning of this exercise, the Government shall urgently request the Parliament's authorization to collect taxes and shall open credits relating to the services voted by decree. The deadlines provided for in this article are suspended when the Parliament is not in session. The Court of Auditors assists the Parliament and the Government in the control of the execution of the finance laws. Article 47-1 Creation Constitutional Law No. 96-138 of February 22, 1996 - art. 3 The Parliament votes on the draft social security financing laws in the conditions provided for by an organic law. If the National Assembly has not pronounced itself in first reading within the twenty-day period after the deposit of a project, the Government shall refer it to the Senate which must rule within a period of fifteen days. It is then proceeded in the conditions provided for in Article 45. If the Parliament has not pronounced itself within a period of fifty days, the provisions of the project may be put into effect by ordinance. The deadlines provided for in this article are suspended when the Parliament is not in session and, for each assembly, during the weeks when it has decided not to hold a session, in accordance with the second paragraph of Article 28. The Court of Auditors assists the Parliament and the Government in the control of the application of the social security financing laws. Article 48 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 4 Organic laws relating to the Parliament must be voted on in the same terms by both assemblies and must be promulgated after declaration by the Constitutional Council of their conformity to the Constitution.
.

Without prejudice to the application of the last three paragraphs of Article 28, the agenda of the assemblies shall, as a priority and in the order set by the Government, include the discussion of bills submitted by the Government and of proposals for laws accepted by it. At least one session per week shall be reserved as a priority for questions from members of Parliament and for the Government's responses. At least one session per month shall be reserved as a priority for the agenda set by each assembly. Article 49, amended by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of 4 August 1995 - Article 5 The Prime Minister, after deliberation by the Council of Ministers, shall engage the Government's responsibility before the National Assembly on its program or, if applicable, on a statement of general policy. The National Assembly shall call the Government to account by voting on a motion of censure. Such a motion shall be admissible only if it is signed by at least one tenth of the members of the National Assembly. The vote shall not take place until forty-eight hours after its deposit. Only votes in favor of the motion of censure shall be counted; it shall not be adopted except by the majority of the members of the Assembly. Except in the case provided for in the following paragraph, a deputy may not be a signatory of more than three motions of censure during the same ordinary session and of more than one during the same extraordinary session. The Prime Minister may, after deliberation by the Council of Ministers, engage the Government's responsibility before the National Assembly on the vote of a text. In this case, the text shall be considered adopted, unless a motion of censure, deposited within twenty-four hours thereafter, is voted on under the conditions provided for in the preceding paragraph. The Prime Minister may request the Senate to approve a statement of general policy. Article 50 When the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure or disapproves the program or a statement of general policy of the Government, the Prime Minister shall submit the Government's resignation to the President of the Republic. Article 51, amended by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of 4 August 1995 - Article 6 The closure of the ordinary session or of extraordinary sessions shall be delayed of right to allow, if applicable, the application of Article 49. For the same purpose, additional sessions shall be held of right. Title VI: Treaties and International Agreements (Articles 52 to 55) Article 52 The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties. He shall be informed of any negotiation leading to the conclusion of an international agreement.


Article 53: Treaties of peace, treaties of commerce, treaties or agreements relating to international organization, those that involve the finances of the State, those that modify legislative provisions, those that relate to the status of persons, those that involve cession, exchange or addition of territory, can only be ratified or approved by virtue of a law. They take effect only after they have been ratified or approved. No cession, no exchange, no addition of territory is valid without the consent of the affected populations. Article 53-1: Creation Constitutional Law No. 93-1256 of November 25th... - single article The Republic may conclude agreements with European States that are bound by identical commitments to its own in terms of asylum and protection of Human Rights and fundamental freedoms, determining their respective competences for the examination of asylum applications presented to them. However, even if the request does not fall within their competence under these agreements, the authorities of the Republic always have the right to grant asylum to any foreigner persecuted for his action in favor of freedom or who requests the protection of France for another reason. Article 53-2: Creation Constitutional Law No. 99-568 of July 8th 1999 - single article The Republic may recognize the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court under the conditions provided for in the treaty signed on July 18th 1998. Article 54: Modified by Constitutional Law No. 92-554 of June 25th 1992 - article 2 If the Constitutional Council, seized by the President of the Republic, by the Prime Minister, by the President of one or the other Assembly or by sixty Deputies or sixty Senators, has declared that an international commitment contains a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify or approve the international commitment in question can only take place after the revision of the Constitution. Article 55: Treaties or agreements regularly ratified or approved have, from their publication, a higher authority than that of the laws, subject, for each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party. Title VII: The Constitutional Council (Articles 56 to 63) Article 56: The Constitutional Council consists of nine members, whose mandate lasts nine years and is not renewable. The Constitutional Council is renewed by thirds every three years. Three of the members are appointed by the President of the Republic, three by the President of the National Assembly, three by the President of the Senate.


In the nine members provided for above, the former Presidents of the Republic are ex officio members for life of the Constitutional Council. The President is appointed by the President of the Republic and has a preponderant voice in the event of a tie. Article 57 The functions of a member of the Constitutional Council are incompatible with those of a minister or a member of Parliament. Other incompatibilities are established by an organic law. Article 58 The Constitutional Council ensures the regularity of the election of the President of the Republic. It examines complaints and proclaims the results of the vote. Article 59 The Constitutional Council rules, in case of dispute, on the regularity of the election of deputies and senators. Article 60 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of 1 March 2005 - art. 2 The Constitutional Council ensures the regularity of the referendum operations provided for in Articles 11 and 89 and Title XV. It proclaims the results. Article 61 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 74-904 of 29 October 1974, v. init. Organic laws, before their promulgation, and the regulations of parliamentary assemblies, before their implementation, must be submitted to the Constitutional Council, which pronounces on their conformity with the Constitution. For the same purposes, laws may be referred to the Constitutional Council, before their promulgation, by the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate or sixty deputies or sixty senators. In the cases provided for in the two preceding paragraphs, the Constitutional Council must rule within a period of one month. However, at the request of the Government, if there is urgency, this period is reduced to eight days. In these same cases, the referral to the Constitutional Council suspends the promulgation period. Article 62 A provision declared unconstitutional may not be promulgated or implemented. The decisions of the Constitutional Council are not subject to any appeal. They are binding on the public authorities and all administrative and judicial authorities. Article 63

Le Conseil supérieur de la magistrature est consulté sur les projets de loi et sur les 
projets de décrets relatifs à l'organisation judiciaire.

A organic law determines the rules of organization and functioning of the Constitutional Council, the procedure that is followed before it, and in particular the deadlines for submitting challenges to it. Title VIII: Judicial Authority (Articles 64 to 66) Article 64 The President of the Republic is the guarantor of the independence of the judicial authority. He is assisted by the Superior Council of the Magistrature. An organic law carries the status of magistrates. The magistrates of the seat are inamovable. Article 65 Modified by Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - art. 1 () JORF 28 July 1993 The Superior Council of the Magistrature is presided over by the President of the Republic. The Minister of Justice is the vice-president by right. He can supplant the President of the Republic. The Superior Council of the Magistrature comprises two formations, one competent with regard to the magistrates of the seat, the other with regard to the magistrates of the prosecution. The formation competent with regard to the magistrates of the seat includes, in addition to the President of the Republic and the Keeper of the Seals, five magistrates of the seat and one magistrate of the prosecution, a Councillor of State, designated by the Council of State, and three personalities not belonging to either the Parliament or the judicial order, designated respectively by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly and the President of the Senate. The formation competent with regard to the magistrates of the prosecution includes, in addition to the President of the Republic and the Keeper of the Seals, five magistrates of the prosecution and one magistrate of the seat, the Councillor of State and the three personalities mentioned in the preceding paragraph. The formation of the Superior Council of the Magistrature competent with regard to the magistrates of the seat makes proposals for the appointments of the magistrates of the seat to the Court of Cassation, for those of first president of court of appeal and for those of president of court of first instance. The other magistrates of the seat are appointed on its favorable opinion. It acts as a disciplinary council of the magistrates of the seat. It is then presided over by the first president of the Court of Cassation. The formation of the Superior Council of the Magistrature competent with regard to the magistrates of the prosecution gives its opinion for the appointments concerning the magistrates of the prosecution, with the exception of the posts to which it is provided in the Council of Ministers. It gives its opinion on disciplinary sanctions concerning the magistrates of the prosecution. It is then presided over by the Prosecutor General of the Court of Cassation. An organic law determines the conditions of application of this article. Article 66 The Superior Council of the Magistrature is consulted on the draft laws and on the draft decrees relating to the judicial organization.
 
justice de la République.

No one can be arbitrarily detained. The judicial authority, guardian of individual freedom, ensures the respect of this principle in the conditions provided for by law. Title IX: The High Court of Justice (Articles 67 to 68) Article 67 A High Court of Justice is established. It is composed of members elected, within it and in equal numbers, by the National Assembly and by the Senate after each general or partial renewal of these assemblies. It elects its President from among its members. An organic law fixes the composition of the High Court, the rules of its functioning and the procedure applicable before it. Article 68 Amended by Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - art. 2 () JORF 28 July 1993 The President of the Republic is only responsible for acts committed in the exercise of his functions in the case of high treason. He can only be accused by the two assemblies voting by an identical vote in public and by an absolute majority of the members composing them; he is judged by the High Court of Justice. Title X: Criminal Responsibility of Members of the Government (Articles 68-1 to 68-3) Article 68-1 Creation Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - art. 4 () JORF 28 July 1993 Members of the Government are criminally responsible for acts committed in the exercise of their functions and qualified as crimes or offenses at the time they were committed. They are judged by the Court of Justice of the Republic. The Court of Justice of the Republic is bound by the definition of crimes and offenses as well as by the determination of penalties as they result from the law. Article 68-2 Creation Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - art. 4 () JORF 28 July 1993 The Court of Justice of the Republic consists of fifteen judges: twelve parliamentarians elected, within it and in equal numbers, by the National Assembly and by the Senate after each general or partial renewal of these assemblies and three magistrates of the seat at the Court of Cassation, one of whom presides over the Court of Justice of the Republic. Any person who claims to be injured by a crime or offense committed by a member of the Government in the exercise of his functions may file a complaint with a commission of requests. This commission orders either the closure of the procedure or its transmission to the Prosecutor General of the Court of Cassation for referral to the Court of Justice of the Republic. The Prosecutor General of the Court of Cassation may also refer the matter to the Court of Justice of the Republic on its own initiative.
 fondamental, 
l'Etat peut, par décret motivé, suspendre l'exercice des compétences des collectivités 
territoriales. La suspension est prononcée par le Conseil d'Etat sur avis conforme de 
la commission des requêtes. Une loi organique détermine les conditions d'application 
du présent article.

Article 68-3 of the Constitution of the French Republic states that the provisions of Title XI, concerning the Economic and Social Council, are applicable to acts committed before its entry into force. Article 69 of Title XI states that the Council, upon request from the Government, gives its opinion on bills, ordinances, decrees, and proposals of law submitted to it. A member of the Council may be designated by it to present its opinion on the projects or proposals submitted to it before the parliamentary assemblies. Article 70 states that the Council may also be consulted by the Government on any economic or social issue. Any plan or draft law of economic or social program is submitted to it for opinion. Article 71 states that the composition of the Economic and Social Council and its rules of operation are established by an organic law. Title XII, concerning the territorial collectivities, states in Article 72 that the territorial collectivities of the Republic are the communes, departments, regions, special-status collectivities, and overseas collectivities governed by Article 74. Any other territorial collectivity is created by law, if necessary in place of one or more of the collectivities mentioned in this paragraph. The collectivities have the vocation to take decisions for all the competences that can best be implemented at their level. In the conditions provided by law, these collectivities are administered freely by elected councils and have regulatory power for the exercise of their competences. In the conditions provided by the organic law, and unless the essential conditions for the exercise of a public freedom or a fundamental right are involved, the State may, by a motivated decree, suspend the exercise of the competences of the territorial collectivities. The suspension is pronounced by the Council of State on the conform opinion of the commission of requests. An organic law determines the conditions of application of this article.


Constitutionally guaranteed, local authorities or their associations may, when provided for by law or regulation, derogate, on an experimental basis and for a limited purpose and duration, from the legislative or regulatory provisions governing the exercise of their powers. No local authority may exercise any form of control over another. However, when the exercise of a power requires the cooperation of several local authorities, the law may authorize one of them or one of their associations to organize the modalities of their joint action.
In the territorial collectivities of the Republic, the representative of the State, representing each member of the Government, is responsible for the national interests, administrative control and respect for the laws.
Article 72-1
Creation Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of 28 March 2003 - Art. 6
The law sets out the conditions under which the electors of each local authority may, by exercising the right of petition, request the inclusion on the agenda of the deliberative assembly of that authority of a question falling within its competence.
In the conditions provided for by the organic law, projects for deliberation or acts falling within the competence of a local authority may, at its initiative, be submitted by way of referendum to the decision of the electors of that authority.
When it is envisaged to create a local authority with a special status or to modify its organization, it may be decided by law to consult the electors registered in the concerned authorities. The modification of the boundaries of local authorities may also give rise to the consultation of electors in the conditions provided for by law.
Article 72-2
Creation Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of 28 March 2003 - Art. 7
Local authorities benefit from resources of which they can dispose freely in the conditions set by law.
They may receive all or part of the proceeds of taxes of all kinds. The law may authorize them to set the base and rate within the limits it determines.
The tax revenues and other own resources of local authorities represent, for each category of authorities, a determinant share of their total resources. The organic law sets out the conditions in which this rule is implemented.
Any transfer of powers between the State and local authorities is accompanied by the attribution of resources equivalent to those devoted to their exercise. Any creation or extension of powers resulting in an increase in the expenditure of local authorities is accompanied by resources determined by law.
 
les droits fondamentaux des travailleurs, la protection de l'environnement, la 
sécurité publique, la santé publique, la protection sociale, la fiscalité et les 
relations extérieures.

The law provides equalization mechanisms to promote equality between territorial entities. Article 72-3 of the Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003 - Art. 8 recognizes, within the French people, the overseas populations, in a common ideal of freedom, equality and fraternity. Guadeloupe, Guyana, Martinique, Reunion, Mayotte, Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon, Wallis and Futuna Islands and French Polynesia are governed by Article 73 for overseas departments and regions and for territorial entities created in application of the last paragraph of Article 73, and by Article 74 for other entities. The status of New Caledonia is governed by Title XIII. The law determines the legislative regime and the particular organization of the French Southern and Antarctic Territories. Article 72-4 of the Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003 - Art. 8 states that no change, for all or part of one of the entities mentioned in the second paragraph of Article 72-3, from one of the regimes provided for in Articles 73 and 74, can take place without the prior consent of the electors of the entity or of the part of the entity concerned, in the conditions provided for in the following paragraph. This change of regime is decided by an organic law. The President of the Republic, on the proposal of the Government during the sessions or on the joint proposal of the two assemblies, published in the Official Journal, may decide to consult the electors of a territorial entity located overseas on a question relating to its organization, its competences or its legislative regime. When the consultation concerns a change provided for in the preceding paragraph and is organized on the proposal of the Government, the latter makes, before each assembly, a declaration which is followed by a debate. Article 73 of the Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003 - Art. 9 states that in overseas departments and regions, laws and regulations are applicable by right. They may be subject to adaptations taking into account the particular characteristics and constraints of these entities. These adaptations may be decided by these entities in the matters in which they exercise their competences and if they have been authorized to do so by law. By way of derogation from the first paragraph and to take into account their specificities, the entities governed by the present article may be authorized by law to set their own rules applicable on their territory, in a limited number of matters which may fall within the scope of the law. These rules may not relate to nationality, civil rights, guarantees of public freedoms, the status and capacity of persons, the organization of justice, the fundamental rights of workers, environmental protection, public security, public health, social protection, taxation and external relations.

-la collectivité peut conclure des conventions avec l'Etat.

Criminal law, criminal procedure, foreign policy, defense, security and public order, currency, credit and exchange, as well as electoral law. This enumeration may be specified and supplemented by an organic law. The provision provided for in the two preceding paragraphs is not applicable to the department and region of La Réunion. The authorizations provided for in the second and third paragraphs are decided, at the request of the concerned collectivity, under the conditions and subject to the reservations provided for by an organic law. They cannot intervene when essential conditions for the exercise of a public freedom or a constitutionally guaranteed right are at stake. The creation by law of a collectivity substituting for an overseas department and region or the institution of a single deliberative assembly for these two collectivities cannot take place without the consent of the electors registered in the jurisdiction of these collectivities having been collected, in the forms provided for in the second paragraph of Article 72-4. Article 74 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 2003-276 of March 28, 2003 - Art. 10 The overseas collectivities governed by the present article have a status which takes into account the particular interests of each of them within the Republic. This status is defined by an organic law, adopted after the opinion of the deliberative assembly, which sets out: - the conditions under which laws and regulations are applicable; - the competences of this collectivity; subject to those already exercised by it, the transfer of competences of the State cannot relate to the matters listed in the fourth paragraph of Article 73, specified and supplemented, if necessary, by the organic law; - the rules of organization and functioning of the institutions of the collectivity and the electoral regime of its deliberative assembly; - the conditions under which its institutions are consulted on projects and proposals for laws and projects of ordinance or decree containing particular provisions for the collectivity, as well as on the ratification or approval of international commitments concluded in matters within its competence. The organic law may also determine, for those of these collectivities which are endowed with autonomy, the conditions under which: - the Council of State exercises a specific judicial control over certain categories of acts of the deliberative assembly acting under the competences it exercises in the field of law; - the deliberative assembly may modify a law promulgated after the entry into force of the status of the collectivity, when the Constitutional Council, seized in particular by the authorities of the collectivity, has found that the law had intervened in the field of competence of this collectivity; - the collectivity may conclude conventions with the State.


Measures justified by local needs can be taken by the community in favor of its population, in terms of access to employment, establishment rights for the exercise of a professional activity or protection of real estate; the community can participate, under the control of the State, in the exercise of the competences it retains, in respect of the guarantees granted throughout the national territory for the exercise of public freedoms. The other modalities of the particular organization of the communities referred to in this article are defined and modified by law after consultation of their deliberative assembly. Article 74-1 Creation Law Constitutional No. 2003-276 of 28 March 2003 - art. 11 In the overseas communities referred to in Article 74 and in New Caledonia, the Government may, in matters which remain within the competence of the State, extend by ordinances, with the necessary adaptations, the legislative provisions in force in metropolitan France, provided that the law has not expressly excluded, for the provisions in question, recourse to this procedure. The ordinances are taken in the Council of Ministers after the opinion of the deliberative assemblies concerned and of the Council of State. They enter into force upon their publication. They become void in the absence of ratification by Parliament within the period of eighteen months following this publication. Article 75 Modified by Law No. 93-952 of 27 July 1993 - art. 3 () JORF 28 July 1993 Citizens of the Republic who do not have the civil status of common law, only referred to in Article 34, retain their personal status until they have renounced it. Article 76 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of 4 August 1995 - art. 12 Modified by Law No. 93-952 of 27 July 1993 - art. 3 () JORF 28 July 1993 The overseas territories may retain their status within the Republic. If they express their will by resolution of their territorial assembly taken within the period provided for in the first paragraph of Article 91, they become either overseas departments of the Republic, or, grouped or not among themselves, Member States of the Community. Title XIII: Of the Community. (Articles 76 to 77) (abolished) Article 76 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 98-610 of 20 July 1998 - art. 1 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 98-610 of 20 July 1998 - art. 2 The populations of New Caledonia are called upon to pronounce themselves before 31 December 1998 on the provisions of the agreement signed in Noumea on 5 May 1998 and published on 27 May 1998 in the Official Journal of the French Republic.
 
particuliers peuvent être conclus entre l'Etat et les Etats membres pour la 
détermination des compétences respectives en matière de justice, d'enseignement 
supérieur, de transports extérieurs et communs et de télécommunications.

Eligible to participate in the vote are persons meeting the conditions set out in Article 2 of Law No. 88-1028 of November 9, 1988. The necessary measures for the organization of the vote are taken by decree of the Council of State deliberated in the Council of Ministers. Article 77 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 14 In the Community established by this Constitution, the States enjoy autonomy; they administer themselves and democratically and freely manage their own affairs. There is only one citizenship of the Community. All citizens are equal before the law, regardless of their origin, race and religion. They have the same duties. Article 77 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 98-610 of July 20, 1998 - Art. 1, Art. 3 After approval of the agreement during the consultation provided for in Article 76, the organic law, taken after the opinion of the deliberative assembly of New Caledonia, determines, in order to ensure the evolution of New Caledonia in respect of the orientations defined by this agreement and according to the modalities necessary for its implementation: - the competences of the State which will be transferred, definitively, to the institutions of New Caledonia, the phasing and the modalities of these transfers, as well as the distribution of the charges resulting therefrom; - the rules of organization and functioning of the institutions of New Caledonia and in particular the conditions under which certain categories of acts of the deliberative assembly may be submitted before publication to the control of the Constitutional Council; - the rules relating to citizenship, electoral regime, employment and customary civil status; - the conditions and deadlines in which the populations concerned of New Caledonia will be called upon to pronounce on the accession to full sovereignty. The other measures necessary for the implementation of the agreement mentioned in Article 76 are defined by law. Article 78 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 14 The scope of the competence of the Community includes foreign policy, defense, currency, common economic and financial policy and policy of strategic raw materials. It also includes, unless a special agreement, the control of justice, higher education, the general organization of external and common transport and telecommunications. Special agreements may be concluded between the State and the Member States for the determination of the respective competences in matters of justice, higher education, external and common transport and telecommunications.
 
sociale de la Communauté et sur les questions qui lui sont soumises par le conseil 
exécutif.
Individuals can create other common skills or settle any transfer of competence from the Community to one of its members. Article 79 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 The Member States benefit from the provisions of Article 77 as soon as they have exercised the choice provided for in Article 76. Until the measures necessary for the application of this title come into force, questions of common competence are settled by the Republic. Article 80 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 The President of the Republic presides over and represents the Community. It has an executive council, a senate and an arbitration court as its organs. Article 81 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 The Member States of the Community participate in the election of the President in the conditions provided for in Article 6. The President of the Republic, in his capacity as President of the Community, is represented in each State of the Community. Article 82 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 The executive council of the Community is presided over by the President of the Community. It is composed of the Prime Minister of the Republic, the heads of government of each of the Member States of the Community and the ministers responsible, for the Community, for common affairs. The executive council organizes the cooperation of the members of the Community on a governmental and administrative level. The organization and functioning of the executive council are laid down by an organic law. Article 83 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 The Senate of the Community is composed of delegates chosen by the Parliament of the Republic and the legislative assemblies of the other members of the Community. The number of delegates from each State takes into account its population and the responsibilities it assumes in the Community. It holds two annual sessions which are opened and closed by the President of the Community and cannot exceed one month each. On the initiative of the President of the Community, it deliberates on the economic and social policy of the Community and on the questions submitted to it by the executive council.


The Senate of the Community examines acts and treaties or international agreements referred to in Articles 35 and 53 and which bind the Community. It takes executive decisions in the areas where it has been delegated by the legislative assemblies of the members of the Community. These decisions are promulgated in the same form as the law on the territory of each of the States concerned. An organic law determines its composition and sets its rules of operation. Article 84 (repealed) Repealed by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 An arbitration court of the Community decides on disputes between members of the Community. Its composition and competence are determined by an organic law. Article 85 (repealed) Repealed by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 Modified by CONSTITUTIONAL LAW No. 60-525 of June 4, 1960, v. init. By way of derogation from the procedure provided for in Article 89, the provisions of this title concerning the functioning of the common institutions are revised by laws voted in the same terms by the Parliament of the Republic and by the Senate of the Community. The provisions of this title may also be revised by agreements concluded between all the States of the Community; the new provisions are put into force in the conditions required by the Constitution of each State. Article 86 (repealed) Repealed by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 Modified by CONSTITUTIONAL LAW No. 60-525 of June 4, 1960, v. init. The transformation of the status of a Member State of the Community may be requested either by the Republic or by a resolution of the legislative assembly of the State concerned confirmed by a local referendum whose organization and control are ensured by the institutions of the Community. The modalities of this transformation are determined by an agreement approved by the Parliament of the Republic and the concerned legislative assembly. Under the same conditions, a Member State of the Community may become independent. It thus ceases to belong to the Community. An independent non-member State of the Community may, by way of agreements, join the Community without ceasing to be independent.
 
de l'Etat ;
- les conditions dans lesquelles les institutions de la Nouvelle-Calédonie pourront 
exercer leurs compétences à l'égard des personnes qui n'ont pas la qualité de 
citoyen de la Communauté.

The situation of these States within the Community is determined by agreements concluded for this purpose, in particular by the agreements referred to in the preceding paragraphs and, where applicable, by the agreements provided for in the second paragraph of Article 85. Article 87 (repealed) Repealed by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of 4 August 1995 - Art. 14 The special agreements concluded for the application of this title are approved by the Parliament of the Republic and the concerned legislative assembly. Title XIII: Transitional Provisions relating to New Caledonia (Articles 76 to 77) Article 76 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 98-610 of 20 July 1998 - Art. 1 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 98-610 of 20 July 1998 - Art. 2 The populations of New Caledonia are called upon to pronounce themselves before 31 December 1998 on the provisions of the agreement signed in Noumea on 5 May 1998 and published on 27 May 1998 in the Official Journal of the French Republic. Those eligible to participate in the vote are those who meet the conditions set out in Article 2 of Law No. 88-1028 of 9 November 1988. The measures necessary for the organization of the vote are taken by decree in the Council of State deliberated in the Council of Ministers. Article 77 (repealed) Repealed by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of 4 August 1995 - Art. 14 In the Community established by this Constitution, the States enjoy autonomy; they administer themselves and democratically and freely manage their own affairs. There is only one citizenship of the Community. All citizens are equal before the law, whatever their origin, race and religion. They have the same duties. Article 77 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 98-610 of 20 July 1998 - Art. 1, Art. 3 After approval of the agreement during the consultation provided for in Article 76, the organic law, taken after the opinion of the deliberative assembly of New Caledonia, determines, in order to ensure the evolution of New Caledonia in respect of the orientations defined by this agreement and according to the modalities necessary for its implementation: - the competences of the State which will be transferred, definitively, to the institutions of New Caledonia, the phasing and modalities of these transfers, as well as the distribution of the charges resulting from them; - the rules of organization and functioning of the institutions of New Caledonia and in particular the conditions under which certain categories of acts of the deliberative assembly may be submitted before publication to the control of the State; - the conditions under which the institutions of New Caledonia may exercise their competences with regard to persons who do not have the status of citizen of the Community.
 
Communauté, des questions de politique étrangère, de défense, de monnaie, de 
politique économique et financière commune et de politique des matières premières 
stratégiques.

The Council of the Constitution;
- Rules relating to citizenship, electoral regime, employment and customary civil status;
- The conditions and deadlines in which the interested populations of New Caledonia will be called upon to pronounce on the accession to full sovereignty.
Other measures necessary for the implementation of the agreement referred to in Article 76 are defined by law.
Article 78 (abolished)
Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14
The scope of the competence of the Community includes foreign policy, defense, currency, common economic and financial policy and strategic raw material policy. It also includes, unless otherwise agreed, the control of justice, higher education, the general organization of external and common transport and telecommunications. Special agreements may create other common competences or regulate any transfer of competence from the Community to one of its members.
Article 79 (abolished)
Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14
The Member States benefit from the provisions of Article 77 as soon as they have exercised the choice provided for in Article 76.
Until the entry into force of the measures necessary for the application of this title, the questions of common competence are settled by the Republic.
Article 80 (abolished)
Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14
The President of the Republic presides over and represents the Community.
It has an executive council, a senate and an arbitration court as its organs.
Article 81 (abolished)
Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14
The Member States of the Community participate in the election of the President under the conditions provided for in Article 6.
The President of the Republic, in his capacity as President of the Community, is represented in each State of the Community.
Article 82 (abolished)
Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14
The executive council of the Community is chaired by the President of the Community. It is composed of the Prime Minister of the Republic, the heads of government of each of the Member States of the Community and the ministers responsible, for the Community, for foreign policy, defense, currency, common economic and financial policy and strategic raw material policy.


Community, common affairs. The Executive Council organizes the cooperation of the members of the Community in terms of government and administration. The organization and functioning of the Executive Council are established by an organic law. Article 83 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 The Senate of the Community is composed of delegates chosen by the Parliament of the Republic and the legislative assemblies of the other members of the Community. The number of delegates from each State takes into account its population and the responsibilities it assumes in the Community. It holds two annual sessions which are opened and closed by the President of the Community and cannot exceed one month each. At the request of the President of the Community, it deliberates on the common economic and financial policy before the vote of the laws taken in this matter by the Parliament of the Republic and, where applicable, by the legislative assemblies of the other members of the Community. The Senate of the Community examines the acts and treaties or international agreements referred to in Articles 35 and 53 and which bind the Community. It takes executive decisions in the areas where it has been delegated by the legislative assemblies of the members of the Community. These decisions are promulgated in the same form as the law on the territory of each of the States concerned. An organic law determines its composition and sets its rules of operation. Article 84 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 An arbitration court of the Community decides on disputes between the members of the Community. Its composition and jurisdiction are determined by an organic law. Article 85 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 Modified by CONSTITUTIONAL LAW No. 60-525 of June 4, 1960, v. init. By way of derogation from the procedure provided for in Article 89, the provisions of this title concerning the functioning of the common institutions are revised by laws voted in the same terms by the Parliament of the Republic and by the Senate of the Community. The provisions of this title may also be revised by agreements concluded between all the States of the Community; the new provisions shall enter into force in the conditions required by the Constitution of each State.
 
identiques.

Article 86 (repealed)
Repealed by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 14
Amended by Constitutional Law No. 60-525 of June 4, 1960, v. init.
The transformation of the status of a Member State of the Community may be requested either 
by the Republic or by a resolution of the legislative assembly of the State 
concerned confirmed by a local referendum whose organization and control are 
ensured by the institutions of the Community. The modalities of this transformation 
are determined by an agreement approved by the Parliament of the Republic and the legislative
assembly concerned.
Under the same conditions, a Member State of the Community may become independent. It 
thereby ceases to belong to the Community.
A Member State of the Community may also, by way of agreements, become independent 
without ceasing to belong to the Community.
An independent non-member State of the Community may, by way of agreements, join the 
Community without ceasing to be independent.
The situation of these States within the Community is determined by agreements concluded for 
this purpose, in particular by the agreements referred to in the preceding paragraphs and, 
where applicable, the agreements provided for in the second paragraph of Article 85.
Article 87 (repealed)
Repealed by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 14
The special agreements concluded for the application of this title are approved by 
the Parliament of the Republic and the legislative assembly concerned.
Title XIV: Association Agreements. (Article 88)
Article 88
Amended by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 13
The Republic may conclude agreements with States which wish to associate with it 
to develop their civilizations.
Title XV: European Communities and the European Union (Article 88-1)
Article 88-1
Amended by Constitutional Law No. 2005-204 of March 1, 2005 - Art. 1
The Republic participates in the European Communities and the European Union, constituted
of States which have freely chosen, under the treaties which have established them, to exercise
in common certain of their competences.
It may participate in the European Union under the conditions provided for in the Treaty 
establishing a Constitution for Europe signed on October 29, 2004.
Title XVI: Revision (Article 89)
Article 89
The initiative for the revision of the Constitution belongs concurrently to the President of 
the Republic on the proposal of the Prime Minister and to the members of Parliament.
The draft or proposal for revision must be voted on by both assemblies in identical terms.
 
spéciale composée de membres du Conseil de la République et de l'Assemblée nationale.

The revision is final after being approved by referendum. However, the revision project is not presented to the referendum when the President of the Republic decides to submit it to the Parliament convened in Congress; in this case, the revision project is only approved if it obtains the majority of three fifths of the votes cast. The office of the Congress is that of the National Assembly. No revision procedure can be initiated or pursued when the integrity of the territory is affected. The republican form of Government cannot be the subject of a revision. Title XVII: Transitional Provisions. (Abrogated) Article 90 (Abrogated) Abrogated by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 14 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - Art. 3 () JORF July 28, 1993 The ordinary session of Parliament is suspended. The mandate of the members of the National Assembly in office will expire on the day of the meeting of the Assembly elected under this Constitution. The Government, until this meeting, has sole authority to convene Parliament. The mandate of the members of the French Union Assembly will expire at the same time as the mandate of the members of the National Assembly currently in office. Article 91 (Abrogated) Abrogated by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - Art. 14 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - Art. 3 () JORF July 28, 1993 The institutions of the Republic provided for in this Constitution shall be in place within a period of four months from its promulgation. This period is extended to six months for the institutions of the Community. The powers of the President of the Republic in office will not expire until the proclamation of the results of the election provided for in Articles 6 and 7 of this Constitution. The Member States of the Community will participate in this first election under the conditions resulting from their status on the date of the promulgation of the Constitution. The authorities established will continue to exercise their functions in these States in accordance with the laws and regulations applicable at the time of the entry into force of the Constitution until the establishment of the authorities provided for by their new regime. Until its final constitution, the Senate is formed by the members in office of the Council of the Republic. The organic laws which will regulate the final constitution of the Senate must be enacted before July 31, 1959. The powers conferred on the Constitutional Council by Articles 58 and 59 of the Constitution will be exercised, until the establishment of this Council, by a special commission composed of members of the Council of the Republic and of the National Assembly.


The peoples of the Member States of the Community continue to be represented in the Parliament until the entry into force of the measures necessary for the application of Title XII. Article 92 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 Modified by Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - art. 3 () JORF July 28, 1993 The legislative measures necessary for the establishment of the institutions and, until this establishment, for the functioning of the public powers shall be taken in the Council of Ministers, after the opinion of the Council of State, by ordinance having the force of law. During the period provided for in the first paragraph of Article 91, the Government is authorized to fix by ordinances having the force of law and taken in the same form the electoral regime of the assemblies provided for by the Constitution. During the same period and under the same conditions, the Government may also take all measures it deems necessary for the life of the nation, for the protection of citizens or for the safeguarding of freedoms. This law shall be executed as the Constitution of the Republic and of the Community. Article 93 (abolished) Abolished by Constitutional Law No. 95-880 of August 4, 1995 - art. 14 Creation Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993 - art. 3 () JORF July 28, 1993 The provisions of Article 65 and of Title X, in their version resulting from Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993, shall enter into force on the date of publication of the organic laws taken for their application. The provisions of Title X, in their version resulting from Constitutional Law No. 93-952 of July 27, 1993, are applicable to facts committed before its entry into force. The President of the Republic: RENE COTY The President of the Council of Ministers, CHARLES DE GAULLE The Minister of State, GUY MOLLET The Minister of State, PIERRE PFLIMLIN The Minister of State, FELIX HOUPHOUET-BOIGNY The Minister of State, LOUIS JACQUINOT The Minister Delegate to the Presidency of the Council, ANDRE MALRAUX The Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice, MICHEL DEBRE


The Minister of Foreign Affairs, MAURICE COUVE DE MURVILLE
The Minister of the Interior, EMILE PELLETIER
The Minister of the Armed Forces, PIERRE GUILLAUMAT
The Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs, ANTOINE PINAY.
